>> Easter Island statues
could hold the secret of what
happened in the world
before history began.
Why did ancient cultures with
no known contacts have so much
in common?
My theory is, they all
derived from a common source,
a single lost civilization.
[THEME MUSIC]
Almost 600 myths collected
on every continent
speak of a global
flood that swept away
an advanced civilization.
This is the basis of
the Noah's Ark story.
I believe that
such stories record
real events that shook the earth
at the end of the last ice age.
The myths say there were
survivors, ancient mariners,
who rode out the flood in great
ships and colonized new lands.
Easter Island today is just a
tiny, windswept volcanic peak,
protruding above the almost
limitless wastes of the Pacific
Ocean.
But before the end
of the last ice age,
things were very different.
Sea levels were almost
400 feet lower then.
And an observer
sitting here, instead
of seeing endless
wastes of ocean,
would have seen a vista of
valleys and mountain peaks,
stretching away
towards the horizon.
Around 13,000 years ago,
the melting ice sheets
unleashed a catastrophic
flood upon the earth.
Historians dispute the myths
of an advanced civilization.
They tell us there were
only primitive tribes
of hunter gatherers then.
No agriculture, no architecture,
no writing, no cities,
and certainly no
advanced civilization.
Yet, if such a
civilization had existed,
its ruins would be under
water, completely out of sight.
My quest is to look for the
traces of its survivors.
Surrounded by the deeps
of the Pacific Ocean,
Easter Island is a
mystery made of statues.
Almost 1,000 of them,
weighing dozens of tons each,
distributed all
around the island.
For hundreds of years,
they were quarried here
in Rano Raraku, hewn
out of the living
rock in this great crater rim.
And then suddenly, for
no apparent reason,
the work stopped.
It's as though the artisans
just downed their tools,
and went away, and never
came back to it again.
Archaeologists see it all
as a great folly, which
came to an end as follies do.
But the ancients weren't stupid.
And they didn't do
all this for nothing.
For a start, the
sculptures are rooted
in astronomy, which
would have been
an essential tool for
the navigators who
first found this place.
The giant statues and the
platforms they stand on
face the rising sun on
specific days of the year,
and target the
significant stars.
It was part of a
massive endeavor
to connect sky to ground.
And it's a pattern I'm seeing
all over the ancient world.
But there's no
evidence whatsoever
of any contact between
these early cultures.
2,000 miles from
anywhere, Easter Island
is the remotest inhabited
spot in the world.
Yet it emerges from legend
as a place of refuge,
for the survivors of
a terrible flood that
had destroyed the
earth at the end
of a prehistoric golden age.
The only real event
that fits the bill
is the sudden end of the last
ice age, when melting ice
caps flooded the globe.
Many coastal areas which
could have supported
an advanced seagoing
civilization
would have been
inundated and the people
forced to find new homes.
>> The geological record
is fairly well established,
that around the 11th,
12th, 13th millennium,
something cataclysmic happened
over the face of the Earth.
The ice melted, producing
tremendous climatic changes.
There were enormous
earthquakes all over the place.
Many, many animals of
the Ice Age went extinct.
Suddenly, the sea levels
rose precipitously,
100 meters within
the space of days.
So when you put all
of this together,
you have a scenario and a
very well-established, deeply
scientific, geological scenario
for dramatic earth changes
everywhere over the
face of the planet.
>> On the other side
of the Pacific Ocean,
there's exciting evidence of
a civilization that could have
been lost in the cataclysm.
It lies off the most southerly
Japanese island of Yonaguni.
In 1997, reports reached me
of a mysterious underwater
structure.
Few geologists even know
about this new discovery.
It's been submerged
since sea levels rose
at the end of the Ice Age.
If these walls and
steps are man-made,
the story of civilization
is thousands of years
older than we thought.
To try to reach some
informed conclusions,
I set up an expedition
with a team of doctors,
including geologist Professor
Robert Schoch, and Egyptologist
John Anthony West.
>> There's just a tremendous
feeling of excitement to get
down there and see this
thing looming at you,
out of the cathedral
gloom at those depths.
There's a sense of the power
and the awe of the structure.
>> I'm starting to get a sense
of exactly what we're looking
at.
And it's just spectacular.
I don't know how to
judge it at the moment.
>> There's a mood of urgency,
because we have to complete
our work before the
current gets too strong.
[SPEAKING JAPANESE]
>> A local shark fisherman
diving for hammerheads
discovered this extraordinary
structure 10 years ago.
It's the height of
a six story building
and the length of
Egypt's Great Pyramid.
The islanders are convinced
it's an ancient monument.
Look at this peculiar trench.
It cuts through
from east to west.
The whole structure feels
designed and organized,
a work of intelligence.
I'm excited to find
these deep, round holes.
They look at the
seatings for large posts.
>> It was so interesting to note
a narrow trench about so wide
and so deep, which runs
perfectly straight for, I would
guess, the best part
of 60, 70 meters.
And off to the side
of that, there's
an indented area, again
with very precise cuts
along the side of it, which I
suppose they could be natural,
but I find it hard to
believe they are natural.
>> It's more spectacular than
anything nature produces, yes,
on the scale of the Grand
Canyon or something like that.
Nature does a pretty good job.
But the angles and planes and
complexity of it gives you--
it's awesome.
It really is.
>> There's two huge
circular holes in the rock,
which go down I guess about from
your chest down to the ground.
>> Hm.
>> And again, one is projecting
one's past experiences onto
these things, but I can't help
thinking postholes to put big
posts in, such as they
have at Stonehenge.
>> Some posts.
I mean, those are
massive things.
Maybe that's where they
boiled the missionaries.
[LAUGHTER]
But whether they're
missionary pots or postholes--
>> Yes.
>> Nature tends not to--
>> Not to do that.
Not to do that.
>> Absolutely.
>> This is really--
I mean, you can't see
it very well on this,
but this, I think, is
really the most spectacular.
>> I agree.
>> But one thing is, when
you look around, I mean,
then you get other areas, which
have the same feel and texture,
but they aren't as spectacular.
>> This is like a focal
point of the monument.
It all seems to me to
be part of a pattern.
>> Yeah.
>> But it was clearly
exposed at one point.
We know that geologically.
I mean, this is--
in my opinion, this
merits further study.
>> This one is not natural.
>> Yeah, no.
>> Interesting.
>> Very interesting.
>> Professor Masaaki Kimura
of Okinawa University is one
of Japan's leading
marine geologists.
He's staked his considerable
professional reputation
on the assertion that the
Yonaguni Structure is man-make
and not a freak
natural formation.
So professor, you've been
studying this monument
intensively for six years.
Are you really sure
that it's man-made?
>> So all my research reveals
that this topography never made
by natural.
So that means this
topography is man-made.
>> Kimura and his team of
students have made more than
200 dives to survey the
structure at Yonaguni.
It is naturally
eroded, but they say
nature could not have produced
the sharp rectangular edges
and other peculiar features
that the monument displays.
>> More and more
interesting as we go along.
>> Yeah, that's interesting.
That's very interesting.
>> And if you are sure
that it's man-made, when?
When do you think
that man made it?
>> Based upon the
sea level change,
the age is older
than 9,000 years.
>> Somewhere between
9,000 and 10,000 years?
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> The last time the sea level
was that low was between maybe
9 and 10,000 years.
>> Yes, yes.
>> But in fact, the monument
itself could have been 12 or 13
or whatever.
>> It's possible.
>> You know, that's
very, very interesting,
because I believe it has
astronomical characteristics.
It points south, and there's
a major east-west feature
running through it.
And 9,900 years
ago, this monument
stood precisely on the
ancient tropic of cancer.
>> Over 10,000 years, the
tilt of the Earth has shifted
the position of the
tropics by about 1 degree.
To determine the
position of the tropics
requires a detailed
knowledge of astronomy.
Such knowledge is
only thought to have
been developed by the Greeks
in relatively recent times.
Its presence here suggests a
very sophisticated civilization
at an impossibly early date.
Before Japan's
underwater monument
was flooded 10,000 years ago, it
stood up above water, directly
on the Tropic of Cancer.
I'm beginning to
think it was part
of a network of astronomical
observatories set up
by a lost civilization
of ancient mariners.
And I think I've found
another link in the chain.
Across the Pacific,
on the tiny island
of Pohnpei in Micronesia.
There are more
strange stone temples
at a site called Nan Madol.
The story goes that
two brothers came here
to establish the temples because
of myths of an underwater city
nearby.
The brothers came from a
mysterious land in the West,
in a great boat.
They climbed a high mountain
overlooking this point.
And down in the bay, they saw
a city drowned under the water.
This told them that they
had found the right place
to build Nan Madol.
The name translates as
"the place in between."
The best way to explore
the Nan Madol structures
is undoubtedly by boat,
because the whole place
is arranged like a sort
of Micronesian Venice.
Unfortunately,
even at high tide,
the channels are
just so clogged up
that it's just not
been possible for us
to get our flat bottomed
boat through here.
So we're having to
explore it on foot.
I'm now standing up to my
shins in warm, sticky mud,
getting a foot massage
from sea cucumbers.
Disgusting creatures.
And I've just seen
a sea snake as well.
If I can get my
feet out of here,
I will try and get into the
main part of the structure.
>> Archaeologists believe
that this temple is at least
a thousand years old, but
very little is known about it.
It's only recently that
experts have considered
the astronomical alignments.
As with Yonaguni and Easter
Island and other sites
I've studied, it's
perfectly oriented
to the points of the compass--
north, south, east, and west.
>> They say the spirit
here is very strong.
People, they come here
when it's getting dark.
When the sun go down,
they move out from here.
Rumors from many old people,
they say in those past days,
in the afternoon, there
are people talking here.
>> Like ghosts.
>> Yeah, they say ghosts.
Yeah.
>> This strange place also comes
complete with myths of why it
was built. They're uncannily
like those I've heard in Egypt
and Cambodia, which speak of
a place to train or prepare
the soul for a
journey after death.
>> Pohnpeians believe
that when a person died,
the soul leaves the
body and goes someplace,
but the someplace that the
soul goes to is under water.
Souls of people who
probably did not do well
will have to go
through certain trials.
There is a bridge
under water, where
those people who need
to go through the trials
will have to cross the bridge.
If they could sing
well, or if they did not
fall from the bridge, then
they are given the passage
to the good world.
>> And that's the
reef out there.
Local legends speak of
sharks guarding the gates
to the sunken city and
of columns under water.
I'm trying to find
those columns,
but unfortunately, the
water gets extremely murky.
Where the land begins to
rise up towards the surface,
I can suddenly see it,
a column, very tall.
Although my depth gauge
isn't working properly,
it's at least five or
six times my own height,
so we're looking at something
30, perhaps even 40 feet tall.
And then I find another column.
That was a very exciting,
puzzling, strange dive.
It's difficult to be
certain whether it
is a natural column of coral,
or whether it's artificial.
I scraped off the
coral in places
and found a white
stone underneath.
And then I swam along further
and found two other columns,
all standing up vertically.
So the mystery deepens.
And it's not clear, by any
means, what we have here.
>> There are other areas around
the coast of Pohnpei where
the local people believe
there actually was structures
underwater.
And this built into
their belief system.
And they consecrated
those as sacred places.
>> Do you feel that it's
possible that it was
consecrated as a sacred place
because of an underwater city?
>> Very, very highly possible.
And if there are
structures, this
is fascinating, not only for us,
but for the rest of the world.
>> Everything that I've learnt
since I got here has convinced
me that Nan Madol is part
of the jigsaw puzzle,
that it is part of this world
wide sky-ground mystery.
>> In Egypt, the Great Pyramid
of Giza were part of an immense
religious system
linked to astronomy.
The Pyramids themselves were
a ground map of the stars.
At Angkor in Cambodia, I
found the same astronomy.
Again, the monuments
map the stars.
At Easter Island, the obsession
with astronomy surfaces again.
Many of the statues line up
with the sun and the stars.
I believe that Pohnpei, Easter
Island, Angkor, and Giza
are linked.
These sites are not
located randomly.
They're the result
of a deliberate plan.
No one could have done
this without being
able to survey the whole world.
That's something we've
been able to do only
in the last few hundred years.
I've come to discuss this idea
with one of the world's experts
on ancient measuring.
John Michell has written a
dozen books on the subject
and researched it for 40 years.
>> The Earth was certainly
surveyed in the past.
They established degrees
of latitude and longitude.
And there is evidence, actually,
that certain places were placed
geographically, either
by local considerations
or by something much bigger.
>> Mm-hm.
Was it something that
was within their grasp,
as far as we
understand the past?
>> We now know a lot about
ancient astronomy and how
proficient many ancient
societies were at it.
And of course, astronomy is
always linked to surveying.
And they certainly had the
equipment, essentially the same
as we had in the
19th century, when
we got perfectly
adequate earth surveys
and measurements of the earth.
Major monuments
are built in units,
which are part of the
Earth's dimensions,
fractions of the
Earth's dimensions.
>> In the 18th century,
when Sir Isaac Newton,
the greatest
scientist of his time,
wanted to measure the Earth, he
looked to the ancient Egyptians
for the answer.
>> So Newton, not knowing
the dimensions of the Earth,
investigated ancient measures
in order to be able to establish
the Earth's dimensions.
That's why he sent John
Graves to measure the Pyramid.
And he made a very good
estimate of it, actually.
He got it just about right.
We seem to have become
rather arrogant in thinking
we're the first people
capable of measuring the Earth
and so on.
>> Our ancestors could only
have measured the Earth through
the study of astronomy.
And there's an unexplained
astronomical relationship
between Giza in Egypt
and Angkor in Cambodia.
Both cultures appear to
have built their temples
as a reflection of particular
star constellations,
as they would have
looked in 10,500 BC.
They couldn't have done
that without knowledge
of the very slow movement of the
stars, known as "precession."
Precession is an almost
undetectable changing
of the star field over a very
long periods of time, caused
by a slight wobble in
the Earth's rotation.
The stars appear to make
a complete revolution
every 26,000 years.
For the cycle to change by
just one degree takes 72 years.
Encore and Giza are
separated on the globe
by exactly 72
degrees of longitude.
In Cambodia, precession is
represented by the number 54,
3/4 of a degree of precession.
All over the site, that number
comes up again and again.
Pohnpei, in the Pacific,
is exactly 54 degrees east
of Angkor.
These sites have
something else in common,
which links to Easter Island.
All of them are described
in their local traditions
as navels or centers
of the world.
>> This curious stone may
be a very important part
of the Easter Island mystery.
It's called te pito kura, which
means "the navel of light,"
or "the navel of the sun."
and the Surat and itself is
called "te pito ote henua,"
one of its ancient names, which
means "the navel of the world."
>> But of course, there's more
to this place than strange
names.
Incredibly, Easter Island
is 144 degrees east
of Angkor, and 144
degrees west of Giza.
That's two degrees
of precession.
A submerged volcanic peak
that was part of the island
before the end of the last
ice age fits the grid exactly.
So I believe that
what we have here
is a network of
interconnected sites, which
the ancients could have used
to map and survey the Earth.
If a civilization was destroyed
at the end of the Ice Age,
its survivors would
certainly have had a motive
to build their new sites
according to a network,
to maintain contact.
But what could have destroyed
such a civilization?
Scientists believe
that the Earth collided
with a comet, which
melted the ice sheets
and unleashed the flood.
>> The Earth was
never a quiet place.
Right from the beginning,
it's been a story of impacts.
Impacts between
comets and meteorites
essentially led to the
formation of the Earth.
So I think it's very hard to
deny that the Earth has been
pounded with comet impacts
right from the very moment
of its creation.
About 13,000 years
ago, a giant comet
became unstable in
its circular orbit
and was perturbed by
Jupiter into an orbit that
crossed the orbit of the Earth.
A pounding episode
of this kind could
have led to the snapping out
of the Earth from the last ice
age.
>> A big impact from outer space
would have caused tidal waves,
fire, and devastation on
an unparalleled scale.
Any civilization
is likely to have
attributed the
devastation from the sky
to the work of the gods.
>> If they saw things happening
from the skies that affected
them so severely
and so dramatically,
I think they would naturally
come to adopt that kind
of world view.
I think it is entirely possible
that a past civilization could
have been completely wiped out
with a collision from space,
just as it is possible that
our present civilization would
come to a dramatic end if
a comet were to collide.
>> It's easy to understand how
a great civilization could have
been rubbed out, and why ancient
mariners who survived would try
so hard to pass on
their knowledge.
It was a legacy of wisdom
and a warning to the future.
Easter Island's ancient name
was "the navel of the world."
In the Andes Mountains
of Peru, I'm on my way
to the sacred Inca
city of Cuzco,
a name that also means "navel."
In the 16th century,
the Incas believed
that the earth was repeatedly
destroyed and reborn.
They feared that the
next cataclysm would
be signaled by a
change in the heavens,
and carefully studied the stars.
The Incas shared the belief I
found in Egypt and Cambodia,
that the souls of the dead
can become stars in the sky.
A cathedral built by the
Spanish conquistadors
now largely covers
the great Inca temple
at Cuzco, which was
called the Coricancha.
The Coricancha was the center
of everything for the Incas,
the center of
spirituality and religion.
But above all else, the
center of astronomy.
>> This was the most sacred
place in Inca cosmology,
literally the navel
of the universe.
Inca legends spoke of
this place as sacred
before the Incas ever came here.
The first Inca found it, the
uncovered navel stone, and this
was taken as a sign that
they should build here
the Coricancha, their
great temple of the sun.
And in the center of it, they
placed this granite coffer,
covered at one time with
55 kilograms of solid gold.
And it was said
that, once a year,
the sun came down here to drink.
>> When the Spanish conquered
the Inca Empire in the 16th
century, they came here
and stole the gold.
The fabulous wealth of
the Incas was pillaged,
and their extraordinary
knowledge was systematically
rooted out and destroyed.
On the heights above Cuzco, I
talked to Dr. William Sullivan.
He's done more than any
other modern scholar
to point out the sophisticated
astronomy of the Incas.
Just like the ancient Egyptians,
they worshipped the sun
and aligned their
monuments to it.
>> The Inca was
the son of the sun.
So it was the Sun King
extending his control
to all the directions
of the empire
and his control over the tribes.
From the Coricancha there
emanated a system of rays
called "ceques," to all
points of the compass.
And so far as we know from
the Spanish chronicles,
these imaginary lines were lines
of sight from the Coricancha
to different places
on the horizon,
representing the direction
of all different tribes.
Organized along
these imaginary lines
were natural power spots--
springs, fountains, and so on.
Each tribe had to take
care of one of them.
And there was a special day
for each one of these shrines.
So it begins to sound
like a calendar.
>> The Incas observed the
sky with incredible accuracy
and saw that the stars were
changing their positions over
long periods of time, the
cycle known as precession.
They calculated that
their link to the stars
and the world of the
ancestors would be cut off
by the changes in the sky,
a prospect that filled them
with terror.
All of their efforts
were aimed at preventing
such a catastrophe.
>> Were they trying
to fix it in some way?
Was that what this
was all about?
>> Yes, I believe that they
were actually attempting to stop
time.
>> The idea of stopping time
might sound far-fetched,
but the Incas believed time
was governed by the stars.
They thought they could
influence the heavens
by their actions on earth.
The edict went out from the
Coricancha to each tribe
to supply a child
to be sacrificed.
Each child represented
at different star.
After walking across
the mountains to Cuzco,
the children were chained to
a statue symbolizing the sun.
The brutal sacrifice
was an attempt
to tie the sun to the
stars, stop their movement,
and thus stop time.
>> The human sacrifice was
very clearly designed to send
the souls of children
from each tribe,
that is each
constellation in the sky,
back to their homeland in
the sky with a message.
And we actually
have the message.
"May the sun and
moon not grow old."
Because when any god grows old,
it's the end of a world age.
And "let there be peace."
Well, with a huge empire
very stable and at peace,
except for a few skirmishes
perhaps at the frontiers,
where was the war?
The war was against time.
>> So the Incas believed
that if they could stop time,
they could stop the
coming cataclysm.
They were not the only culture
to believe in such things.
From all around the
world, there are
myths of cyclical world
ending catastrophes.
And like the myths
surrounding the great flood,
many are surprisingly
close to fact.
>> The more that we investigate
the astronomical myths,
the more it seems that they
do speak of actual events.
Myths from all around
the world frequently
talk of a periodic
disturbance of life on Earth
by fire, which could be
volcanic eruptions, explosions
that could occur from
cometary impact and so forth.
The amazing thing
is that not only
are they aware that
those events can occur,
but they have this kind
of millennial faith
that our Earth organism,
the earth itself and life
on the earth, could
recuperate and recover
from those catastrophes.
Eventually, life on
Earth would begin again
in a new cycle of existence.
And that's why they were
so obsessively fascinated
with plotting these
long term cycles.
>> The Incas inherited their
knowledge from a people who
were said to have come from
the fabled city of Tiahuanaco,
near the shores of Lake
Titicaca in Bolivia.
If there's anything
to the Inca beliefs,
we'd expect to find evidence
of complex astronomy here.
And we do.
No one has studied
Tiahuanaco more intensively
than those Oswaldo Rivera,
the distinguished Bolivian
archaeologist.
He took me to the famous
Gateway of the Sun,
to explain its
astronomical significance.
>> Well, from this line, we have
the 11 little representations
of the sun.
This is a solar
calendar in stone.
>> Right.
So this way, they
would observe the range
of the sun along the horizon
during the course of the year,
and track it symbolically
with these sun figures.
>> And this is a
little human figure.
He's a trumpetist.
He's the announcer of the sun
is going to move to the middle.
>> I see.
So the trumpeter marks
the extreme position
of the solstice.
Yes.
>> Mm-hm.
From this, we have December.
>> Yeah.
>> January.
>> February.
>> Yeah.
>> March.
>> Yes.
>> April.
>> May.
>> Yeah.
>> And June.
>> Yes.
>> Not just the gateway, but the
whole site is designed to track
the rising and
setting of the sun.
The controversial
archaeologist, Arthur Posnansky,
who lived at Tiahuanaco
for 20 years,
worked out how the
temple accurately
marks the significant
points of the solar year.
Posnansky deduced that,
in such an accurate site,
the placing of
the corner pillars
would have been
designed to target
the extreme positions of the
sun in its annual movement
across the sky.
Because of the changing
tilt of the Earth,
the sun's position now falls
outside the corner posts.
Recent calculations
by Oswaldo Rivera
show that the sun
would have matched
the pillars in 10,500 BC.
It's astonishing, but
that's exactly the day
that the Sphinx and the
Pyramids of Giza line
up with the stars over Egypt
and the temples of Angkor
match the stars over Cambodia.
Three sites all linked
astronomically to 10,500 BC?
That can't be a coincidence.
There's another
link at Tiahuanaco.
Posnansky found ancient
harbor constructions
which suggest that
Tiahuanaco was once
a port on Lake Titicaca.
Over thousands of
years, the lake
has receded and is now 12 miles
away from the city and 300 feet
lower.
Geologists I spoke
to confirmed it
would have taken between 10
and 13,000 years for the lake
to recede that far.
That puts us back to the time
when the last ice age came
cataclysmically to an end.
It changed the
face of the Earth,
and I believe destroyed a great
civilization of prehistory.
The ancient mariners who
survived the cataclysm
spread out around the world.
There are myths at
Tiahuanaco, which
speak of the arrival of a pale
skinned, bearded god credited
with bringing civilisation
to South America.
His name was Viracocha.
And I'm standing in
front of an image of him
here at Tiahuanaco.
And you can see the goatee
beard on this figure.
Viracocha was said to
have come to the Andes
in a time of darkness,
after a great cataclysm.
And he and his companions
traveled northwards,
teaching a religion of
compassion and love,
and teaching also skills such
as astronomy and architecture.
>> They were said to have
come from across the sea,
in a boat that moved by
itself without paddles,
and to have established
themselves at Lake Titicaca.
The boat-building skills
of the local Aymara Indians
have long been acknowledged.
It was here that Thor Heyerdahl,
the Norwegian anthropologist
and explorer, proved that
larger boats of the same design
were capable of
crossing the Pacific.
Heyerdahl had such an
ocean-going boat built
for his Kon-Tiki expedition.
He sailed it from Peru,
across the Pacific,
and past Easter Island.
The boats are made
from totora reeds.
Almost identical boats
were made in ancient Egypt,
using papyrus reeds.
What both of these styles
of boat have in common
is that they are based on an
ocean-going design with a very
high prow and curving stern.
This ancient tradition, which
has been passed from father
to son, down the generations
for thousands of years,
is coming to an end.
And perhaps it'll just become
another part of mankind's
forgotten knowledge.
As forgotten as the
boat-building skills
of ancient Egypt,
which I believe
must have been inherited
from the same source.
The design is identical.
Sophisticated boats, 70
feet long with an ocean
going design, have
been excavated in Egypt
from tombs more than
5,000 years old.
>> This relief from 1,500 BC
documents an amazing expedition
that the ancient Egyptians
made down the Red Sea
and into the Indian Ocean,
probably to the coast
of Somalia, to bring
back frankincense trees,
beloved of the gods.
When we look at the
precise astronomy reflected
in ancient Egyptian
architecture,
isn't it obvious that the
lost prehistory of this people
includes millennia of
navigational experience?
>> I believe that the survivors
of the lost civilization
I'm searching for settled in
Egypt thousands of years before
the pharaohs.
Their knowledge
and their memories
of the world before the
flood were passed down
from one generation to
another, until hieroglyphs
could set them in stone.
This is the temple of
Edfu in Upper Egypt.
Carved on its walls are
acres of hieroglyphic texts,
which speak of a time
when the gods lived
on an island, surrounded
by a vast ocean.
A terrible flood destroyed the
island and drowned almost all
of its divine inhabitants.
>> There were only
a few survivors,
amongst them seven sages, also
called the seven builder gods,
who chose to settle in Egypt.
They traveled around
this land, building
sacred mounds, which were
to be the foundations
of all future temples.
Their objective was nothing
less than to recreate
the former world of the gods.
>> What the myths are telling
us couldn't be clearer,
and fits perfectly with
everything we now know about
the cataclysmic history of the
Earth during the past 13,000
years.
Out of the waters
of the global flood
at the end of the
last ice age, I
believe that a few survivors
of an advanced civilization
did make their way
to Egypt and did
attempt to establish
it as a cosmic land,
mirroring the
patterns of the stars
as they last appeared
in 10,500 BC.
Water erosion patterns around
the Great Sphinx of Giza
provide strong
geological evidence
that this monument
at least may actually
have been built in that epoch.
Its face is an
emblem of mystery,
As are the great
stone heads of Angkor
lying in the jungles of Cambodia
72 degrees to the east of Giza.
What is the real history
of the underwater monument
at Yonaguni in Japan?
And the great statures
Easter Island, surely not
accidentally left lying exactly
midway between Giza and Angkor.
>> Human knowledge is fragile.
And the treasures of wisdom
are easily destroyed,
as the experience of
Easter Island proves.
There may be many explanations
for the similarities
and connections that we found
interlinking all these places,
but I believe that
the best explanation
is a lost civilization, lost
in the night of time that
once touched them all.
I think it's possible that that
civilization knew something
that we do not, and
that its survivors,
after the great cataclysm
that brought the last ice
age to an end, went to
extraordinary lengths
to keep that knowledge alive.
It was fundamentally
a spiritual teaching
that concerned the
mission of humanity
here on Earth, not
to lose ourselves
in the illusion of
material things, material
greed, material ambition,
but to understand
that material life is a precious
opportunity for each individual
to learn and to grow
and to develop, to equip
the soul for immortality.
The teaching still
exists, locked away
in the myths and the
monuments and the astronomy.
And it can be retrieved.
Poised at the edge
of a millennium,
after a century of unparalleled
wickedness and bloodshed,
perhaps we need the ancient
wisdom more than ever before.
[THEME MUSIC]